Adventure Primer
This adventure is designed for three to seven characters,
levels 1 and 2, and is optimized for five characters with an
average party level (APL) of 1. Characters outside this level
range can’t participate in this adventure.
This adventure occurs in Icewind Dale, north of the
Spine of the World.

Background
ICEWIND DALE has been subsumed in permanent
darkness, and the citizens of TEN-TOWNS struggle to
survive what they’re calling the EVERLASTING RIME.
This curse, leveled by the goddess AURIL, brings even
greater hardship than usual to the denizens of the frozen
lands of the North.

An awakened walrus called MOTHER TUSK has
brought a group of animals to the safety of the SPINE OF
THE WORLD, hoping to protect them from being used by
an evil druid to wreak further havoc on the civilized areas
of Icewind Dale. Mother Tusk fights against civilization,
nature, and otherworldly forces to keep her family safe,
and she requests the heroes’ help to stem the threats
against everyone.

Overview
The adventure’s story is spread over six parts: a prologue,
four 1-hour episodes, and a conclusion. Played individually,
each episode should be playable in an hour, and the entire
adventure should be playable in approximately 4 hours.
Characters who haven’t yet completed an episode begin
with the prologue. Characters who’ve completed all the
episodes, or characters who don’t plan to play any more
episodes, experience the conclusion at the end of the
episode they’re playing.

Prologue—Avalanche. An avalanche threatens the
characters, but they’re led to safety by an odd muskrat.
They then meet Mother Tusk who briefs them on four
tasks she’d like them to undertake in return for saving
their lives during the avalanche.

Unsure Footing. Mother Tusk asks the characters
to rescue one of her children, an awakened otter
named Spritzel, who’s been spying on Easthaven. The
characters quickly find Spritzel, and some of his otter
friends, fleeing from a pack of wolves.

In this introduction, the characters’ path into
Icewind Dale is blocked by an avalanche as they
navigate a pass through the Spine of the World.
They’re rescued by a curious animal, which leads
to a meeting with Mother Tusk, leader of a strange
menagerie of creatures.
When you’re ready to begin, read:
"""
As snow and rocks crash down the mountainsides
either side of you, you can’t help but wonder if this is
how everything ends for you. What brought you here,
navigating this dangerous mountain pass, heading north
into the frozen lands of Icewind Dale? An opportunity for
wealth and power? A dark secret you’re trying to escape? A
fresh start? An old connection?
Whatever brought you here, it seems the rumors might
be true. Strange, weather-related phenomena are shutting
down travel through the Spine of the World mountain
range. Several passes have been blocked, and you thought
this one might be clear. And it was, until now.
As certain death descends swiftly toward you, movement
at the corner of your eye draws your attention. A snowywhite muskrat gestures frantically, its clawed paws
beckoning you to follow. It slides into a fissure in the
ground that was hidden under snow and ice.
"""

Assuming the characters follow the muskrat, they plummet
down the fissure just as the avalanche crushes everything
in the pass. The characters fall down a vertical tunnel,
which turns into a slide. The passage levels out, depositing
them in an icy cavern beneath the mountains.
"""
The icy slide dumps you unceremoniously into a cold
cavern. The muskrat stares you in the eye, then wiggles a
bit, as if happy to see you survived the close call.
A voice from deeper in the cavern echoes toward you, its
Common marked by a slobbery rasp. “Muskie found you in
time. Good fortune!”
The voice comes from a ten-foot-long walrus resting in
the shadows. A walrus calf rests at her side. It starts to
wriggle its way toward you, but she pulls it back with one
of her long tusks.
Other creatures then move out of the shadows to
examine you. This menagerie includes a variety of animals,
everything from snow foxes to wolf pups to avian creatures
to reptiles. A few seem to converse with each other as they
eye you warily.
“Excuse my children,” says the walrus. “They’re
suspicious by nature. Their lives often depend on it. My
children call me Mother Tusk, and you may as well. I saved
your lives for a reason.”
"""

Use the following bullet points to guide the conversation.
(Keep an eye on the time if you’re running the episode in an
hour or less):
• Mother Tusk was awakened by a goliath druid from
the North. The druid died, and Mother Tusk took over
stewardship of the animals in the druid’s care. (This
is only partially true. The druid was corrupted and is
still alive, and Mother Tusk fled from him with as many
creatures as she could recruit. She feared he’d use the
animals in a bloodthirsty animal army. She doesn’t wish
to discuss this with the characters at this time.)
• A terrible curse has befallen the lands north of the Spine
of the World: the sun refuses to rise. Survival, never easy
here, has been made more difficult by this curse.
• Mother Tusk offers the characters passage beneath the
Spine of the World if they agree to search for a scout in
her family named Spritzel. The young otter may have
run afoul of trouble.

Shall We Just Crack On?
If they agree to perform at least one task, Mother Tusk and
her family lead the characters through the tunnels until
they reach the open air. She then leads them to a cave,
where the Redrun river meets the Redwaters lake. This is
her current base of operations.
Once the characters have chosen a task, proceed to the
corresponding episode and continue.

Lighting in Icewind Dale
Unless otherwise noted in the adventure, daytime hours
provide dim light outdoors, while the nighttime hours are
dark. The permanent dusk of Auril’s curse makes the promise
of sunlight seem a teasing possibility, but the sun never
breaks the horizon.

In this episode, Mother Tusk asks the characters
to rescue one of her children, an awakened otter
named Spritzel, who was spying on the town of
Easthaven.
The characters quickly find Spritzel, and some of
his otter friends, fleeing from a pack of wolves. The otters
take shelter in a cave with ice slides, the wolves in close
pursuit. The characters must navigate the ice slides to save
the otters before the wolves kill them. Then the characters
must survive the cold trip back to Mother Tusk. When the
characters choose this task, read:
"""
Mother Tusk explains what she needs you to do, “I sent one
of my children, a young otter called Spritzel, on a scouting
mission to watch the happenings in one of the Ten-Towns
where the two-leggers dwell. He isn’t back yet. He often
gets himself into trouble and I need you to go look for him
and make sure he isn’t in danger. We’ve spotted wolves in
the area, that could be dangerous for Spritzel.”
"""

Give the characters the chance to ask questions. Below are
Mother Tusk’s answers to the most common questions the
characters may ask:
What Does Spritzel Look Like? “He’s a white-furred otter
with a brown patch above his right eye, and he wears a
pearl earring.”
Who Was He Spying On? “He was watching the
happenings in the town of Easthaven. A contact in one
of the other towns asked me for a favor. But that isn’t
important right now.”
What Will You Give Us for Doing This? “I can only offer
you my thanks, as well as the gift of your lives that I
already saved once.”
How Far Away Is Easthaven? “From here, it’s more than
ten miles. But I expect Spritzel’s closer than that. Look
for tracks as you travel northeast along the shore of
Redwaters.”

When the players head off on the task, read:
Travel is incredibly difficult in the deep snow. A bitter wind
cuts through your clothing, and ice crystals riding the
strong breeze sting your eyes.

Assuming the characters follow directions, it doesn’t take
them long to find tracks:
After you’ve traveled about two miles from Mother Tusk’s
shelter, you notice something on the ground. Although the
wind pushes snow around, easily spotted animal tracks
mar the fresh dusting.

A successful DC 10 Wisdom (Survival) or Intelligence
(Nature) check reveals that the deeper tracks were made
by wolves, while the smaller tracks on top of the snow were
made by otters.
At this point, call for a DC 10 group Wisdom (Survival)
check. Give advantage to characters with backgrounds that
would give them a lifetime of experience tracking things or
surviving in harsh winter conditions.
If the group succeeds, they easily follow the tracks. Go
immediately to “Sliding” below. (If all characters succeeded
on the check, they all have advantage on saving throws in
the “Freezing” section below.)
If the group fails, they lose the tracks several times and
take longer to find the wolves and otters. The cold begins
to take its toll. In the “Freezing” section of this episode,
the characters have disadvantage on their saving throws.
Continue to “Sliding” below.

Sliding
When the characters reach the end of the trail they’re
following, read:
Ahead of you, through the blowing snow, a pack of wolves
chase a romp of a dozen otters, which weave through and
around snow mounds and ice formations.
As the wolves close in, the sneaky otters zip through
holes in the snow-packed earth. The wolves hesitate, but
then the lead wolf barks a command, and the wolves leap
into the holes as well, baying as they go.

If the players ask if one of the otters was Spritzel, a
successful DC 10 Wisdom (Perception) check confirms that
one had a brown patch above its eye and a pearl earring.
Further, a successful DC 10 Wisdom (Animal Handling)
check reveals that the lead wolf was acting strangely, as if
it was more intelligent than a normal wolf. (This is because
the wolf is awakened, and if the party is Very Strong, it’s a
dire wolf.)

The characters can quickly reach the holes in the earth,
which are large enough for Medium creatures to enter
without issue. They hear the growls of wolves and the
squeaking of otters echoing up from the depths.
If the characters jump into the holes, they find themselves
on a series of ice slides leading down. Traversing these
slides requires a Dexterity (Acrobatics) check. The results
of the check for each character determine what happens
when they reach the bottom:
* Poor result: The character lands in a heap at the bottom.
They take 3 (1d6) bludgeoning damage from the
fall and start combat prone.
* Bad result: The character takes no damage but starts
combat prone.
* Fine result: The character navigates the slide successfully and
lands on their feet at the bottom of the slides.
* Good result: The character lands in perfect fighting position
and has advantage on their initiative roll.

Inspiration. Ask the players to narrate and describe their
characters’ trips down the ice slides. Award inspiration to
players who do so with enthusiasm and storytelling skill.
When all the characters have landed at the bottom of the
slides, continue to “Fighting.

When you’re ready to continue, read:
The ice slides end in a chamber flooded with a foot of
frigid water. The otters swim adeptly at the far side of the
cavern, avoiding the wolves’ snapping jaws. The icy bite of
the water seeps up your wet clothes.
At the back of the cavern, a low, ice-covered shelf rises
out of the water.

For a view of the area, refer to The Ice Slides Map.
Wolves. Four wolves are attacking the otters but are
having trouble catching the slippery creatures. The leader
of the wolf pack is Vundrel, an awakened wolf sent by her
druid master to hunt Mother Tusk and her family.
When the characters arrive, Vundrel growls at them in
deep, snarling Common, “This is our hunt. Find your own
food.” That’s all the talking Vundrel does before ordering
her packmates to attack the characters.
Otters. The otters use the Dodge action until the
characters intervene. On the third round of combat, once
it’s obvious the characters are here to assist them, Spritzel
calls on his otter friends to help the characters:
“Let’s get ’em, mates! What ho!” squeaks Spritzel in
Common. The otters don’t have stats, but they work as a
team. Each round, they swarm the closest wolf, and the
next attack roll against that wolf has advantage.
Alternately, if one of the characters is in trouble, the
otters instead help that character, and the next attack roll
against that character has disadvantage

Saving Spritzel
If the characters defeat the wolves, Spritzel’s overjoyed. He
addresses the characters in a high, squeaky voice humming
with overwrought energy:
“Thank you! We were returning from the town, and we saw
a vicious owlbear with black feathers and we ran away, but
then we saw the wolves, so we ran from them, but they saw
us and chased us and we couldn’t lose them, but we found
these tunnels, but they followed us down, but you rescued
us—” He stops abruptly. “Wow, you look cold!”

Treasure. The frozen body of an explorer who died here
months ago rests on the back shelf of the cave. The only
thing of note on the body are its boots, which are boots of
false tracks embroidered with gaudy, but worthless, gems.
Continue with “Freezing.”

When the combat ends and the characters (and the otters)
are out of immediate danger, a new danger presents itself:
Dripping wet in the freezing water, the cold of the North
seeps into your bones. This frigid water could kill you
unless you find a way to get warm and to dry your clothes,
but the chamber is flooded with water and there’s nothing
to burn. What are you going to do?

Anyone proficient in Survival or who succeeds on a DC 10
Wisdom (Survival) or Intelligence (Nature) check knows
the following:
• Being drenched in cold water then moving through air
this cold is most likely fatal in three hours or less.
• It’s at least a three-hour walk back to Mother Tusk’s
location, and that’s only true if someone isn’t slowed
from exhaustion. Even an hour in the cold could easily
lead to serious exhaustion.
• Creating a heat source to dry off and warm up is vital to
survival at this point. Unfortunately, there isn’t much to
burn in a watery cavern.
Remember, if the party failed their checks to track the
animals earlier, their Constitution saving throws to avoid
freezing (see below) are made with disadvantage. (If all the
characters succeeded on their checks, they have advantage
on these saving throws.)

The characters have a few choices
to make if they want to survive:
A Cold, Wet Trek. If they just climb out of the tunnels
and start back to Mother Tusk’s location, they must succeed
on a DC 10 Constitution saving throw or gain a level of
exhaustion for each 30 minutes of travel during the 3-hour
trek. (That means 6 checks.) If any character gains 2
levels of exhaustion, they then move at half speed. Strong
characters might carry exhausted characters, but it’s still a
huge risk

Burning Wolves. The characters can attempt to set
the dead wolves ablaze to make heat. This could be
done on the ice shelf in the cavern, but the smoke could
be dangerous. This allows the characters to dry their
clothes and get warm, but they must succeed on a DC 10
Constitution saving throw or gain a level of exhaustion
from the smoke.
Climbing the ice slides with the wolves’ bodies is possible
but takes effort. Each attempt takes 30 minutes, and the
characters must succeed on a DC 12 group skill check.
Allow each character to use an ability and skill that makes
sense to the overall success of the endeavor. This lets them
get the wolves out, where they can burn them without
worrying about fumes.
Wherever they decide to start the fire, they must have
the means to start it. Fire magic, dry tinderboxes, or a
successful DC 10 Wisdom (Survival) check to light a fire
without the proper tools are three options.

Finding Wood or Other Fuel. If the characters attempt
to get to the surface without dragging the wolves, it takes
30 minutes to climb out, no check needed. From there, the
characters can collect enough fuel with a successful DC
10 group skill check. Allow each character to use an ability
and skill that makes sense to the overall success of the
endeavor. Then they must have a means to start the fire,
such as fire magic, dry tinderboxes, or a successful DC 10
Wisdom (Survival) check to light a fire without proper tools

Otter Assistance. The romp of otters can assist in small
ways, but they must do so as a group. For example, they can
assist one character in their assigned task. Or alternatively,
the otters can huddle around one character to provide them
with enough warmth to automatically succeed on their next
Constitution saving throw against the cold.

Magic. Spellcasters will inevitably try to fix the entire
problem with cantrips like prestidigitation, druidcraft,
or control flames. Allow ingenious uses of this magic to
help the cause without completely overcoming the entire
challenge. For example, allow 30 minutes of casting one of
these spells every round to dry one person’s clothes, giving
them advantage on their saving throws to resist the cold.
Of course, a character on cantrip duty can’t contribute to a
task like moving wolves or searching for fuel.

Conclusion
If the characters get back to Mother Tusk’s encampment, she
starts a fire to warm them up. Spritzel excitedly recounts the
harrowing fight with the wolves and the journey back, and he
offers them his earring as a thank you, as well as other small
gems and trinkets he’s hidden away in the area. Mother
Tusk rewards the characters with two spell scrolls of cure
wounds. They can also take a long rest in her care.
At the end of this episode, if a character has completed
two episodes, they may choose to gain a level—or they can
decline the level. However, once they reach level 3, they
may not play any more episodes in this adventure.
